A Key to the Voynich Manuscript

Gino Caspari1,2*†, Agnese Faccini3†

1
    Domestication and Anthropogenic Evolution Research Group, Max Planck Institute of Geoanthropology,

Kahlaische Str. 10, 07745 Jena, Germany

2
    Institute of Archaeological Sciences, University of Bern, Mittelstrasse 43, 3012 Bern, Switzerland

3
    Independent Scholar


†contributed equally
*
caspari@gea.mpg.de


Keywords
Manuscript, Voynich, Decryption, MS408, Cipher, Romance Language, Cryptography

Abstract
The Voynich Manuscript is a 15th century text which features herbalist, pharmaceutical, balneological, and

astronomical illustrations [1]. Despite numerous attempts over the past 100 years the text has so far resisted

all efforts at decryption. Even the application of sophisticated statistical methods has not led to a clear

identification of the language the text is written in and leaves some chance that it is perhaps an elaborate

hoax [1]. Here we partially decode the Voynich alphabet and provide an identification of the Voynich

language as vernacular Italian (lingua volgare) written in shorthand. We are able to show that the words we

read make sense in the context of the illustrations. We provide a lexical list of 400+ words that can be

consistently read throughout the text in vernacular Italian with our decipherment and show that the text

displays morphological and grammatical features consistent with the language identification. While there

is more work to be done in translating the text, the key to the manuscript’s decipherment is now available.
Main

The Voynich Manuscript, cataloged as MS408 in Yale University’s Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript

Library, has remained undeciphered since its acquisition by book dealer W. Voynich near Rome in 1910 or

1911 [1]. The manuscript is written in an unknown script and language, with no direct translation or

decryption to this day despite numerous attempts including ones by specialists of the United States National

Security Agency [cf. 2]. The manuscript’s contents span five distinct thematic sections, including detailed

illustrations of plants, astrological charts, pharmaceutical descriptions, and balneological scenes featuring

human figures immersed in baths. It consists of 116 vellum folios, although several pages are missing [1,

3].


Some have proposed that the manuscript is written in a cipher [4, 5, 6] while others have suggested it

possibly might be a hoax with no actual linguistic meaning [7, 8, 9]. However, several linguistic and

statistical analyses have shown that the manuscript's structure is too complex and organized to be mere

gibberish, hinting at a real language or system of encoding [10]. Some suggest it is written in a cipher based

on a known language like Latin, Hebrew, or an early Romance language. Others, such as Bax [11] and

Cheshire [12], have proposed partial decodings, claiming the manuscript uses a blend of different medieval

languages, including Italian, Occitan, and Latin. Still, these attempts have remained controversial and have

not been widely accepted by the academic community. A limited one line solution for Latin has been

proposed by Gibbs [13] and Hauer and Kondrak [14] propose Hebrew as the language of the manuscript.

Bowern and Lindemann [1] most recently point out how many of the proposed solutions exhibit “strong

confirmation bias, omitting any information that does not fit the theory they propose” and focus on

vocabulary while leaving out morphology and syntax [1].


Some researchers believe that the manuscript could have been created by multiple authors or scribes, which

might explain inconsistencies in the handwriting and structure [15]. Radiocarbon dating of the vellum by
the University of Arizona consistently show a calibrated age in the early 15th century [16], however, the

dates remain unpublished and might shift slightly with the availability of a new calibration curve [17].


The literature on the identifications of the plants shown in MS408 is extensive as these identifications might

yield hints on the vocabulary appearing in the text. While some claim that the plants are not identifiable

[18], others make extensive comparisons with medieval herbalist codices [19]. Perhaps most

controversially, [20] identifies some of the plants to originate in the Americas. Recently, [21] have

elaborated upon the idea and suggest that therefore New World languages need to be considered as well.

These ideas have been challenged by [1]. The plant illustrations do appear in stylized fashion typical for

15th century manuscripts and are therefore consistent with the radiocarbon dates of the vellum.


The main problem with all previous deciphering attempts is that none of them have gone beyond individual

words or lines and deciphered longer passages of text in the context of the illustrations (except for [22]). It

has never been shown that a language proposition was effectively transferable to all parts of the manuscript.


In the following we will show a careful bottom-up approach in first deciphering individual words in the

context of illustrations. We then develop the alphabet of MS408. Based on this alphabet, we identify words

from every page of the manuscript. We identify the language and elaborate upon the grammatical and

morphological aspects of the words and word combinations we read.



Results

Serendipitously, one of the first legible words which allowed us to start this deciphering attempt was the

word POLAR next to a star illustration, indicating we had identified the North Star as a guiding

accumulation of letters for the next steps (Figure 1a). The word consists of familiar letters which can be

read: a π for P, an o for O, a λ for L, an a for A, and an r for R.


        Given the initial seemingly successful attempt with identifying star names and the availability of

terms for stars in the chronologically close Almagestum Claudii Ptolemei of 1528 [23], we were able to
identify further instances which were legible based on the letters identified in POLAR. The Pleiades or

Seven Sisters are immediately apparent from the illustration and while we later noticed that Bax [11] had

correctly proposed the association of this illustration with the Taurus constellation, we independently came

to the same conclusion. However, we read the letter sequence as TOARE not as TAURN [11]. Once it

became clear that “o” at the beginning of words is often an article (as is common in some early vernacular

romance languages), this allowed for the reading of more words. O’CETE likely refers to the constellation

of Cetus and O’COR(vo) possibly refers to the constellation of Corvus (Figure 1d, 1e). Both constellations

are featured in the Almagestum and were thus known at the time of the manuscript’s creation [23].




Figure 1: Initially identified terms for celestial bodies and constellations. A) A star illustration joined by the letters
POLAR indicating the North Star. B) A star illustration with the letters EXPE (possibly shortened for Experia) a name
for the Evening Star Venus. C) The Pleiades cluster with the letters TOARE (Taurus) indicating its affiliation with the
constellation of the bull. D) A star illustration with the letters O’CETE (possibly the Cetus constellation). E) A star
illustration with the letters O’COR (possibly shortened for the Corvus constellation).

Based on these letters we were then able to develop a partial alphabet which features the most frequent

characters and ligatures and allows for an Italian vernacular reading of the text. We have not been able to

unequivocally decipher some of the rare characters, but the frequently occurring letters allow to read the

majority of words. Folio 66r of MS408 features an itemized list, where individual characters stand for each

item in the list. The assumption that these are all individual characters, allowed us to identify the letter M

which so far had often been read as two or even three separate glyphs.
Table 1: The key to a lingua volgare reading of MS408


    Glyph       Meaning     Explanation                                                 Vocabulary Example

                A           Latin letter “a” like in the word “polar” (Polaris, North
                            Star).




                B           A rare character in the manuscript, often obscured by
                            contractions. Here the word “arbor” (tree).




                C           One of the so-called gallows characters, denoting “c”
                            here in the word “color” (color).




                D           One of the so-called gallows characters denoting “d”
                            here in the word “odore” (smell).




                E           The number 9, a mirrored “e” like in the word
                            combination “piente” (abundant).




                F/P         A greek p, pronounced “f” like in the word “o’c(e)fal”
                            (head) or in the word “polar”.




                G           A rare character, often obfuscated by contractions. Here
                            o’g(a)mo (marriage, sex). Identification remains
                            uncertain.
I     A letter potentially confusable with the letters for “r”
      and “g”. Here the word combination “p(er)vivi” (for the
      living)




L     A lambda standing for “l” like in the word “oliar” (to
      oil).




M     A difficult letter to read, like here in “compie” (to
      complete / to fill). It is often split in two or even three
      parts and therefore misidentified as several glyphs.




N     Like “m” a difficult letter to read as the line between
      two parts is often obscured leading to it being read as
      “a-r”. Here the word “fornare” (to bake, to roast).


O     Latin letter “o”. Like in the word “sorore” (sister, nun).
      “o” often appears in front of nouns as an article or in
      front of verbs as a pronoun.




P/F   A greek p, pronounced “p” like in the word “porpor”
      (purple, crimson).




Q     A “4” almost always followed by the letter “o” forming
      the word “qo”. Here the word combination “qo
      exfoliare” (which to exfoliate). Also see “qo sorore”
      above.



R     A left-tilted small “r” as in “o’dolor” (pain).
             S        Like the letter “x” but with only one loop on top, like
                      here in the word “o’sole” (the sun).




             T        The number 8. Here the word “torpore” (dizziness).




             U        Written as a “c” like here in o’cute (skin). The
                      identification is particularly clear with the word “qo”
                      which is usually written without a “u” but appears
                      occasionally written as “quo” (e.g. folio 43r line 13)




             V        Closely written double “c” like in the word “ovui”
                      (eggs).




             X / SS   Like the letter “s” but with two loops on top. Here the
                      word “exfol(ie)” (without leaves).




 Special

Characters

             M~       The letter “m” followed by an additional stroke
                      indicating the syllable “mo”. Here the word “palmo”
                      (palm). The glyph most frequently occurs as a verb
                      ending indicating 1st person plural present tense.




             N~       The letter “n” followed by an additional stroke
                      indicating the syllable “no” Here the word “c(a)none”
                      (canon).
            P̉ /F̉   A “p” or “f” sound with a shortening sign on top. This
                     glyph exclusively stands for i-related syllables like “pi”,
                     “fi”. Here the word “fiore” (flower).




Ligatures

            Re       Ligature at the ending of words meaning “re” a
                     combination of both letters like here in the word
                     “o’colore” (the color).




            Te       Similar to the re-ligature but with a rounded left side. A
                     combination of the letters “t” and “e”. Here in the word
                     “alte” (high).




            CP       A ligature consisting of the letter c and the letter p/f like
                     here in the word “c(e)pol” (onion).




            DP/DF    A ligature consisting of the letter d and the letter p/f like
                     here in the word combination “de folie” (of leaves).




            SP       A ligature consisting of the letter s and the letter p/f like
                     here in the word “s(e)parare” (to divide).




            XP       A ligature combining the letter x and the letter p/f like
                     here in the word “expuimo” (to spit out?)
This simple substitution cipher allows for reading the majority of words in MS408. The missing letter H is

not required for vernacular Italian and we have not identified any suitable candidates among the glyphs that

could represent this letter. J and K can be represented by I and C respectively. W does not exist in Latin nor

in vernacular Italian. In Latin Y is only used for Greek loanwords. Z is often written as T in vernacular texts

and therefore not necessarily needed here either.


        Based on this reading of the glyphs, we have created a list of 400+ words and word combinations

which can be accessed in the Supplementary Information. It is important to note that we consider all of

these identifications as potential and preliminary. The text is written in shorthand and thus words do need

context for their proper identification. While some words are fully rendered, the majority of them are

contracted and MS408 features some extreme contractions for the most common words as is the case for

other medieval manuscripts written in shorthand.



Discussion

There have been various and ongoing attempts to produce a transliteration of MS408. R. Zandbergen

provides an excellent overview over the history of development of the transliterations in [24]. We, however,

decided to only work with the manuscript. The reason for this decision is that transliterations like the

Extended Voynich Alphabet (EVA) and Voynich101 (v101) go into a great amount of detail which can

obscure the meaning and ambiguity of individual glyphs: In both EVA and v101, some glyphs which are a

unit, are broken up, some glyphs which should be split, are represented together, and others which are

merely variations of the same letter, are featured separately. These problems and the resulting redundancy

might also be a reason – in addition to the text being written in shorthand – why computational approaches

which rely on machine readable transliterations have so far not been successful.


        The vocabulary which we were able to generate, maybe unsurprisingly for a manuscript featuring

herbal illustrations, features a significant number of words related to plants. Plant parts like fiore (flower),
tal(l)o (shoot), pomo (fruit), ramo (branch) and folie (leaves) are among the most frequent words. The word

flower for example occurs in different spellings as fior, fiore, and fiuor. This adds support to the idea that

the manuscript was written by multiple authors [cf. 15] possibly from different parts of Italy with diverging

dialects. The word for leaf/leaves most commonly occurs in its abbreviated form fol, but occasionally is

fully rendered as folie. We have made a number of potential identifications of plant names such as pino

(pine), orno (mountain ash, sorbus aucuparia), pion(ia) (peonies), sofor(a) (papilionacea), and iss(o)pe

(hyssop, hyssopus officinalis). Related adjectives and adverbs like opimo (fertile), and i(e)male

(overwintering) are featured in the text and a number of other terms relating to vegetation and horticulture

like arbor (tree), tal(l)ete (sucker nursery), and olivete (olive groves) can be found. We also identify a

number of verbs which directly relate to horticulture like potare (to trim, to cut), piotare (to cover with

sods), arare (to plough), colonare (to reclaim land), and possibly also t(err)are (to cover with soil / to

plant). While many of these terms are only potential identifications due to the inherent ambiguity of a

shorthand text, we believe that the quantity of such terms is a strong argument for the identification of the

MS408 language as vernacular Italian.


        Although the characters used have to be considered an encrypted alphabet, it is a simple substitution

cipher with separate letters and a small number of ligatures. The problem is that frequently used words are

written in a contracted form – a common practice in medieval manuscripts. The manuscript uses

abbreviations for many words, often indicating only the initial part of a word or the letters forming its root.

Nonetheless, we were able to identify some grammatical and morphological features. At this stage we can

only preliminarily identify some aspects which give further clues regarding the language identification:


        A preceding “o” stands for an article when the word is a noun, consistent with many early Romance

languages. This is most clearly illustrated by the word color(e) and o’colore in Table 1. There are a number

of examples where words appear both with and without the article throughout the text. The article “o”

precedes both masculine and feminine singular nouns. This practice of attaching the article to the noun is

also seen in 15th century herbal manuscripts like the Erbario della biblioteca Gambalunga [25].
        The MS408 language furthermore features additional preceding agglutinations like the word qo

(which/that) which is added to the front of a noun or verb, resulting in many terms starting with the

otherwise unusual letter combination qo. Another likely prefix is the word d(e) (of). There are potentially

other agglutinating syllables like (e)x (from) and ol (to the). Different from modern Italian, MS408 seems

to use just one articulated preposition “ol” (instead of al, allo, alla, ai, etc.) and likely one pronoun for

feminine and masculine singular nouns.


        We have not been able to fully make sense of the verbs in the text. Most forms appear to be written

in present tense first person plural like in the cases of pot(a)mo (we cut/trim), alt(a)mo (we grow/increase),

sort(a)mo (we extract), foc(a)mo (we set on fire), etc. The verb essere seems to often be hidden unless it

occurs in other modes or tenses (fui, fusse). The spelled-out forms of essere indicate that we are closer to

vernacular Italian than to Late Latin. An omitted or implied verb “to be” is also common practice in many

vernacular Italian texts.


        We also identify a number of word accumulations which create meaning together (Figure 2). Given

the uncertainty regarding the word identifications, these have to be considered with the appropriate

skepticism, but they seem to follow a grammatical structure which is in agreement with an identification of

the language as vernacular Italian. It seems unlikely, that a cipher would yield a meaningful word

combination like o’ d(e)po(r)vi ovui (to lay eggs into) if it were to be completely wrong (Figure 2c).

Furthermore, these word combinations allowed us to identify similar texts which occasionally even feature

the same abbreviations but are not written in cipher. The Carta Balanina (13th century) [26], the Letters of

Andrea di Bartolomeo di Ghino (14th century) [27], and Ghino's herbal manuscript (first half 15th century)

[28] show for example the same use of n(on), pche/pce for p(er)c(h)e, and a single agglutinated p for p(er).

They also feature a plethora of words which are contracted the same way as the vocabulary of MS408:

bott(ega), cint(ali), co(m)p(er)ate, p(ar)te, and others that reveal the same type of shorthand.
Figure 2: Examples of words which can be read in context: A) folio 2r line 1. B) folio 88r line 13. C) folio
24r line 15. D) folio 102r line 11-12. E) folio 106r line 47. F) folio 2r line 2 (dashed lines exclude the
illustration interrupting the text).


        Finally, we can hypothesize based on the vocabulary we identified and the historical authors for

which we found the best vocabulary matches that MS408 might have originated somewhere in central Italy

The main authors we find use similar words as in MS408 are Dante Alighieri (Firenze 1265 – Ravenna

1321), Torquato Tasso (Sorrento 1544 – Roma 1595), Giovanni Boccaccio (Certaldo 1313 – Certaldo

1375), Francesco Petrarca, (Arezzo 1304 – Arquà 1374), Ludovico Ariosto (Reggio Emilia 1474 – Ferrara

1533), and Jacopone da Todi (Todi ca. 1230-1236 – Collazzone 1306) (see Supplementary Information).

The majority of authors in whose texts we find correspondences to the MS408 vocabulary stem from Tuscan

cities like Firenze, Siena, and Pisa. Especially in the 14th and 15th century, a large number of herbal

manuscripts was produced in Italy often in volgare or in a Latin full of vernacular terms [29] – the MS408

belongs to this group of manuscripts.



Conclusion

After more than one hundred years of unsuccessful attempts at deciphering, the key we provide here finally

allows for an identification of the language of MS408 as an Italian vernacular written in shorthand. Given

the frequent claims of deciphering, we want to make it clear that we see the proposed alphabetic cipher as

preliminary and potentially needing substantial corrections as more words are read in context. However,

we uncovered a rich vocabulary related to plants and horticulture consistent with the illustrations seen on
many pages. MS408 relies on a simple substitution cipher where each glyph stands for a letter of the Latin

alphabet with the exception of some ligatures and abbreviated frequently occurring syllables. The use of a

shorthand characteristic of medieval manuscripts in combination with the cipher and the agglutinating

reductive characteristics of the manuscript is likely the reason why it has proven to be so challenging to

read MS408. While ambiguities remain and there certainly are improvements to be made with regards to

the identifications of vocabulary, we trust that this article is able to provide the basis for future

multidisciplinary studies leading to a proper translation of the Voynich Manuscript.



Methods

Through an initial identification of the unabbreviated words “polar” and “torpore” we were able to associate

some MS408 glyphs with characters of the Latin alphabet. This reduced the options space for potential

languages consistent with the 15th century date of the manuscript significantly. We hence worked with the

assumption that the text is written in a European language and more likely a romance language like Late

Latin, vernacular Italian, Catalan, Occitan, or French. We then followed a discursive approach: using text

messaging apps the authors discussed the identifications of individual words and expanded the set of

characters available. MS408 features an enumeration list on folio 66r which uses individual glyphs. This

was helpful in identifying individual characters. The glyphs for m, n, mo, and no were particularly difficult

because they are often split into several parts and not easily recognizable as one unit. Rare letters such as b

and g took longer to identify and some uncertainty remains as only few words feature them. Some ligatures

also remain unclear.


        We then proceeded to identify individual words throughout the entirety of the manuscript with the

aim of finding readable words on every folio. Reading some of the words in context with other words and

in context with the illustrations allowed us to revise previous assumptions. We created a list of potential

vocabulary (see Supplementary Information). As MS408 is written in shorthand, many of the individual

identifications remain ambiguous. The context can help reduce this ambiguity, but the words supplied in
the lexical list have to be understood as potential identifications and not as unequivocal readings. We used

solely words which could be identified through the Tesoro della Lingua Italiana delle Origini [30], the

online dictionary of the Accademia della Crusca [31], and Treccani Enciclopedia della Lingua Italiana

[32] to substantiate word identifications. The best identifications are words which have only one or no

contraction and allow for an obvious direct correlation with an illustration on the same folio. Ultimately,

the full context including grammatical structures will need to be taken into account in order to substantiate

the individual identifications. We have provided quotes from authors roughly contemporary with the

manuscript for each word identification, which allows for the words to be read in context in a contemporary

source. Each of the quotes also features other words occurring in the manuscript, showing that these words

form part of a coherent vocabulary.


         Shorthand manuscripts are notorious for their ambiguity with regards to word endings and extreme

contractions. It is possible to create a grammatically correct text in vernacular Italian, however, some

uncertainties remain regarding the identifications of individual words due to the abbreviated nature of many

terms.
References

[1] Bowern, C. L., & Lindemann, L. (2021). The linguistics of the Voynich manuscript. Annual

Review of Linguistics, 7(1), 285-308.

[2] D’Imperio, M. E. (1978). An Application of Cluster Analysis to the Question of “Hands” and

“Languages” in the Voynich Manuscript. National Security Agency.

[3] Davis, L. F. (2020). How many glyphs and how many scribes? Digital paleography and the

Voynich Manuscript. Manuscript Studies: A Journal of the Schoenberg Institute for Manuscript

Studies, 5(1), 164-180.

[4] Sterneck, R., Polish, A., & Bowern, C. (2021). Topic modeling in the Voynich manuscript.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.02858.

[5] Layfield, C., van der Plas, L., Rosner, M., & Abela, J. (2020, May). Word Probability

Findings in the Voynich Manuscript. In Proceedings of LT4HALA 2020-1st Workshop on

Language Technologies for Historical and Ancient Languages (pp. 74-78).

[6] Lindemann, L., & Bowern, C. (2020). Character entropy in modern and historical texts:

comparison metrics for an undeciphered manuscript. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14697.

[7] Rugg, G., & Taylor, G. (2017). Hoaxing statistical features of the Voynich Manuscript.

Cryptologia, 41(3), 247-268.

[8] Gaskell, D., & Bowern, C. (2022). Gibberish after all? Voynichese is Statistically Similar to

Human-Produced Samples of Meaningless Text. In VOY.

[9] Daruka, I. (2021). On the Voynich manuscript. Cryptologia, 45(1), 44-80.
[10] Montemurro, M. A., & Zanette, D. H. (2013). Keywords and co-occurrence patterns in the

Voynich manuscript: An information-theoretic analysis. PloS one, 8(6), e66344.

[11] Bax, S. (2014). A proposed partial decoding of the Voynich script. Unpublished manuscript

available online at: https://stephenbax. net/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/Voynich-a-provisional-

partial-decoding-BAX. pdf.

[12] Cheshire, G. (2019). The language and writing system of MS408 (Voynich) explained.

Romance Studies, 37(1), 30-67.

[13] Gibbs, N. (2017). Voynich manuscript: The solution. Times Literary Supplement, 8.

[14] Hauer, B., & Kondrak, G. (2016). Decoding anagrammed texts written in an unknown

language and script. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 4, 75-86.

[15] Davis, L. F. (2020). How many glyphs and how many scribes? Digital paleography and the

Voynich Manuscript. Manuscript Studies: A Journal of the Schoenberg Institute for Manuscript

Studies, 5(1), 164-180.

[16] Schmeh, K. (2013). A milestone in Voynich manuscript research: Voynich 100 conference
in Monte Porzio Catone, Italy. Cryptologia, 37(3), 193-203.

[17] Reimer, P. J., Austin, W. E., Bard, E., Bayliss, A., Blackwell, P. G., Ramsey, C. B., ... &

Talamo, S. (2020). The IntCal20 Northern Hemisphere radiocarbon age calibration curve (0–55

cal kBP). Radiocarbon, 62(4), 725-757.

[18] Taiz, L., & Taiz, S. L. (2011). The biological section of the Voynich manuscript: a textbook

of medieval plant physiology?. Chronica Horticulturae-Subscription, 51(2), 19.
[19] Sherwood, E. (2013), The Voynich Botanical Plants. Available

http://www.edithsherwood.com/voynich_botanical_plants/ [08.09.2024].

[20] O'Neill, H. (1944). Botanical Observations on the Voynich MS. Speculum, 19(1), 126.

[21] Tucker, A. O., & Janick, J. (2019). Flora of the Voynich Codex. Springer International

Publishing.

[22] Crowe, F. (2022). The Voynich manuscript decoded. Journal of Historical Archaeology and

Anthropological Sciences, 7(3), 94-131.

[23] Claudii Ptolemaei Pheludiensis Alexandrini Almagestum seu magnae constructionis

mathematicae opus plane diuinum latina donatum lingua ab Georgio Trapezuntio usque quaq.

doctissimo. Per Lucam Gauricum Neapolit. diuinae matheseos professorem egregium in alma

vrbe Veneta orbis regina recognitum anno salutis MDXXVIII labente, [Venezia : Lucantonio

Giunta il vecchio] (In vrbe Veneta ... : Luceantonii Iunta officina aere proprio, ac typis excussa,

horoscopante Iouia stella in calce febru. ..., 1528), Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale di Roma

IT\ICCU\CNCE\29477

[24] Zandbergen, R. (2022). Text Analysis - Transliteration of the Text. Available

https://www.voynich.nu/transcr.html#links [09.22.2024].

[25] Herbarium: Libro di Medicamenti e Segreti, SC-MS.8, Biblioteca Gambalunga, Rimini

(Italia).

[26] Carta Balanina, 1 H 7, 2, Archives Départementales de la Haute Corse, Bastia (Corsica).

[27] Ghini Andrea di Bartolomeo di Ghino da Siena a Datini Francesco di Marco, Fondaco di

Pisa, busta 427, inserto 9, codice 301166, Archivio di Stato di Prato (Italia).
[28] Erbario Mediceo (Ghino’s Herbal Manuscript), MS Redi 165, Biblioteca Medicea
Laurenziana, Firenze (Italia).

[29] Baltrušaitis, J. (1955). Le moyen âge fantastique. Antiquités et exotismes dans l’art

gothique. Paris: Flammarion.

[30] TLIO (2024). Tesoro della Lingua Italiana delle Origini. Available

http://tlio.ovi.cnr.it/TLIO/ [27.12.2024].

[31] CRUSCA (2018). Grande dizionario della lingua italiana. Available

https://www.gdli.it/ricerca/libera [27.12.2024].

[32] TRECCANI (2024). Vocabolario On Line. Available https://www.treccani.it/ [27.12.2024]




Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Francesca Ughi Faccini for advice regarding Latin and Greek and Thea

Caspari, Jasmin Sekulovski, and Dr. Lauren Erland for plant identifications and advice on

horticultural practices.


Data Availability Statement

All data are contained within the manuscript and the supplementary information.


Funding Statement

No funding was received for this study.
Competing Interest

The authors declare no competing interests.
